tut: add private party tutorial (#1015)
midnightntwrk/midnight-docs: docs/tutorials/private-party/smart-contract.mdx

---
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
copyright: This file is part of midnight-docs. Copyright (C) Midnight Foundation. Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); You may not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0 Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
sidebar_label: "Private party contract"
title: "Private party contract"

> description: "Learn about best practices while building an RSVP contract."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Build a private party contract on Midnight that demonstrates the privacy boundary, Unshielded NIGHT tokens, and access control in Compact."
```

sidebar_position: 10

> toc_max_heading_level: 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
toc_max_heading_level: 2
tags:
  - tutorials
  - private-party
  - compact
  - beginner
  - unshielded-tokens
  - privacy
  - midnight-network
```

---

# Private party contract

> The private party tutorial is a beginner level demonstration of the following features:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The private party tutorial is a beginner-level demonstration of the following features:
```

- Unshielded token send/receive (NIGHT)
- The privacy boundary
- persistentCommit

> - DApp specific public keys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- DApp-specific public keys
```

It has two main components:
1. Compact contract
1. Test script

> This tutorial demonstrates writing safe and secure Compact contracts with no witnesses, private data and verifying the operation of the contract with MidnightJS in a local devnet test script. It is best consumed by writing each code block by hand rather than copying and pasting code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial demonstrates writing safe and secure Compact contracts with no witnesses and private data, and verifying the contract's operation with MidnightJS in a local devnet test script. Write each code block by hand rather than copying and pasting code.
```

The focus in this tutorial is on Compact, the test script is provided.

## Prerequisites

Before you begin this tutorial, ensure you have:
- [Installed the toolchain](../../getting-started/installation)
- Node.js v22+

## Problem analysis

> The private party contract provides a mechanism for the party organizer to collect RSVP notifications for a party while maintaining the privacy of party attendees up until a specific boundary, where attendees then become public. This tutorial will refer to this as the "privacy boundary" and it is an important element to understand when developing Midnight DApps. In this example paying the entry fee in Unshielded NIGHT tokens crosses the privacy boundary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The private party contract lets the party organizer collect RSVP notifications while maintaining attendee privacy up to a specific boundary, where attendees then become public. This tutorial refers to this as the "privacy boundary," an important element to understand when developing Midnight DApps. In this example, paying the entry fee in Unshielded NIGHT tokens crosses the privacy boundary.
```

> In Compact, privacy is the default and you as the DApp developer hold the responsibility to manually transition a piece of data from private to public. However, certain functions in Compact will *always be public*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Compact, privacy is the default and you as the DApp developer hold the responsibility to manually transition a piece of data from private to public. However, certain functions in Compact are *always public*.
```

> For example, ledger writes, returns from exported circuits, contract-to-contract calls and Unshielded token transfers are all public domain. Hashing and commitment schemes in Compact can obfuscate data needing to be passed through the first three of these domains, but what about Unshielded tokens?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, ledger writes, returns from exported circuits, contract-to-contract calls, and Unshielded token transfers are all public. Hashing and commitment schemes in Compact can obfuscate data passed through the first three of these domains, but what about Unshielded tokens?
```

Unshielded tokens are always public.

This tutorial will demonstrate absolute privacy for party attendees until the Unshielded token transfer, at which point the privacy boundary is crossed and privacy is no longer maintained.

## Program design

> The private party program will maintain privacy of party attendees by letting them RSVP to a party with a DApp specific public key that hides their identity. The party organizer will collect an entry fee in NIGHT tokens. NIGHT is an Unshielded and therefore these transactions are public. This means that the attendees of the party will be private until they pay the entry fee and arrive at the party.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The private party program maintains privacy of party attendees by letting them RSVP to a party with a DApp-specific public key that hides their identity. The party organizer collects an entry fee in NIGHT tokens. NIGHT is an Unshielded token, and therefore these transactions are public. The attendees of the party remain private until they pay the entry fee and arrive at the party.
```

> The organizer will maintain privacy within the DApp until the contract pays out the fees claimed by the organizer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The organizer maintains privacy within the DApp until the contract pays out the fees claimed by the organizer.
```

### Operational steps

First, consider the operational components of the contract. What does the contract need to do?

In order, it needs to:
1. Deploy the contract and allow the organizer to set some initial values
1. Privately allow attendees to RSVP to the party
1. Give access to the organizer (and only the organizer) to start the party
1. Allow attendees who have previously RSVP'd to check-in to the party
1. Close the doors for entry (organizer only)
1. Payout fees to the organizer

### Data: private by default

> Compact treats data as private by default. This application will demonstrate setting a piece of private state data and passing it privately into Compact circuits. No party attendee data will be public until the Unshielded token transfer occurs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compact treats data as private by default. This application demonstrates setting a piece of private state data and passing it privately into Compact circuits. No party attendee data is public until the Unshielded token transfer occurs.
```

::::note

> While Compact treats all data as private by default, certain domains are *always public*. This includes: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::::note[Always-public domains]
While Compact treats all data as private by default, certain domains are *always public*. This includes:
```

- Ledger fields
- Returns from exported circuits
- Contract to contract calls
- Unshielded transactions

::::

### Access control

> An important aspect of developing smart contracts in open public systems, like the Midngiht blockchain, is access control to circuits. Once the contract is deployed to the blockchain, its circuits effectively become public APIs that can be called by *anyone*. This means that secure Compact contracts need to guard access to circuits if they are intended to be called by only a specific user or type of user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An important aspect of developing smart contracts in open public systems, like the Midnight blockchain, is access control to circuits. Once you deploy the contract to the blockchain, its circuits effectively become public APIs that *anyone* can call. Secure Compact contracts need to guard access to circuits intended for only a specific user or type of user.
```

## Compact tutorial

> Compact provides a significant amount of flexibility for a DApp developer to precisely define a mix of public and private data. This tutorial will focus primarily on the Compact code and the remainaing setup code comes with the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compact provides a significant amount of flexibility for a DApp developer to precisely define a mix of public and private data. This tutorial focuses primarily on the Compact code and the remaining setup code comes with the repository.
```

### Setup

Start by cloning the private party repository:
```bash
git clone git@github.com:midnightntwrk/example-private-party.git
```

Open the project in your text editor and navigate to the `contracts` directory before creating a new `.compact` file.
```bash
cd example-private-party/contracts && touch private-party.compact
```

The first thing to do is declare the language version and imports:
```compact
pragma language_version 0.23;
import CompactStandardLibrary;
```

Then declare an enum of custom states:
```compact
export enum PartyState {
    NOT_STARTED,
    READY,
    STARTED,
    DOORS_CLOSED,
    FEES_CLAIMED
}
```

Next, declare the *public* ledger fields:
```compact
export sealed ledger organizer: Bytes<32>;
export sealed ledger maxListSize: Uint<16>;
export sealed ledger entryFee: Uint<16>;
export ledger partyState: PartyState;
export ledger hashedPartyGoers: Set<Bytes<32>>;
export ledger checkedInParty: Set<UserAddress>;
```

The keyword `sealed` denotes immutable ledger fields that can only be set during constructor execution and cannot be changed after the constructor completes.

### Witnesses

> This contract uses no witness functions, but they can be useful to modify private state data in-circuit, provide off-chain computation or enable functionality that does not exist in Compact, such as the math operation for division. Witnesses are only declared in Compact, they are implemented in the off-chain Typescript code and therefore the return from a Witness cannot be trusted without prior validation. For a demonstration of witness functions, see the [Battleship tutorial](../bship/smart-contract#witnesses).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This contract uses no witness functions, but they can be useful to modify private state data in-circuit, provide off-chain computation, or enable functionality that does not exist in Compact, such as division. Witnesses are only declared in Compact. They are implemented in the off-chain TypeScript code, and therefore the return from a witness cannot be trusted without prior validation. For a demonstration of witness functions, see the [Battleship tutorial](../bship/smart-contract#witnesses).
```

> This contract uses no witness functions, but they can be useful to modify private state data in-circuit, provide off-chain computation or enable functionality that does not exist in Compact, such as the math operation for division. Witnesses are only declared in Compact, they are implemented in the off-chain Typescript code and therefore the return from a Witness cannot be trusted without prior validation. For a demonstration of witness functions, see the [Battleship tutorial](../bship/smart-contract#witnesses).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This contract uses no witness functions, but they can be useful to modify private state data in-circuit, provide off-chain computation, or enable functionality that does not exist in Compact, such as division. Witnesses are only declared in Compact. They are implemented in the off-chain TypeScript code, and therefore the return from a witness cannot be trusted without prior validation. For a demonstration of witness functions, see the [Battleship tutorial](../bship/smart-contract#witnesses).
```

This tutorial will access private state data via Compact circuit inputs.

### Constructor

Next, set up the constructor that executes on contract deployment. The party organizer will deploy this contract.

First, validate the inputs are non-zero before creating a unique identifier for the organizer:
```compact
constructor (partySize: Uint<16>, fee: Uint<16>, _secret: Bytes<32>) {
    assert(partySize > 0, "The party size must be greater than zero");
    assert(fee > 0, "Fee must be greater than zero");

    const pubKey = getDappPublicKey(_secret);
    organizer = disclose(pubKey);

}// end of constructor
```

> The implementation for `getDappPublicKey()` will come later, for now, just understand that the organizer provides a secret that is hashed to provide a "public key" that is specific to this DApp. Compact circuit inputs are private, so the `_secret` is passed from private state directly to the circuit inputs and never exposed publicly. The `pubKey` is safe to store on the ledger publicly, because it does not tie to the organizers address or any other identifying information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation for `getDappPublicKey()` comes later. For now, understand that the organizer provides a secret that is hashed to provide a "public key" specific to this DApp. Compact circuit inputs are private, so `_secret` passes from private state directly to the circuit inputs and is never exposed publicly. The `pubKey` is safe to store on the ledger publicly, because it does not tie to the organizer's address or any other identifying information.
```

Now that you have verified the inputs and privately identified the party organizer, set the remaining ledger fields:
```compact
    entryFee = disclose(fee);
    maxListSize = disclose(partySize);
    partyState = PartyState.NOT_STARTED;

}// end of constructor
```

Before the party starts, attendees need to RSVP that they plan to attend the party. You will implement the following circuit to allow this privately:
```compact
export circuit rsvp(_address: UserAddress, _secret: Bytes<32>): [] {
    const pubKey = getDappPublicKey(_secret);
    // caller authentication check
    assert(pubKey != organizer, "Organizer cannot RSVP to the party");

    // state verification check
    assert(partyState == PartyState.NOT_STARTED, "The party has already started");
    assert(hashedPartyGoers.size() < maxListSize, "The list is full");

}// end of rsvp
```

> The same `getDappPublicKey()` circuit can be used for both organizers and party attendees to create a unique identifier that maintains privacy. The unique `_secret` passed in to this circuit will return a different hash for each secret.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same `getDappPublicKey()` circuit can be used for both organizers and party attendees to create a unique identifier that maintains privacy. The unique `_secret` passed into this circuit returns a different hash for each secret.
```

After `assert`ing that the organizer isn't trying to attend their own party, the state of the contract is verified to be correct to accept RSVPs.

> Next, you'll create a commitment to the `UserAddress` provided by the caller:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, create a commitment to the `UserAddress` provided by the caller:
```

    hashedPartyGoers.insert(commitHash);// doesn't need disclose bc persistentCommit

}// end of rsvp
```

With this pattern, the caller of this circuit ties the provided address to their secret and creates a cryptographic commitment to these values. The `commitAddress()` circuit will be written later, but it allows public storage of the hash while maintaining privacy of the underlying values and enabling a check of these values later.

The last thing to do in this circuit is automatically trigger a state change if the list is full:
```compact

    if (hashedPartyGoers.size() == maxListSize) {
        partyState = PartyState.READY;
    }
}// end of rsvp
```

Now that the RSVP circuit is working, add the ability for the organizer to start the party:
```compact
export circuit startParty(_secret: Bytes<32>): [] {
    const pubKey = getDappPublicKey(_secret);
    assert(organizer == pubKey, "Only the organizer can start the party");
    assert(partyState == PartyState.READY || partyState == PartyState.NOT_STARTED, 
        "The party is not in the correct state for this operation");

    partyState = PartyState.STARTED;
}// end of startParty
```

> This is a simple circuit that identifies the callers `pubKey`, checks that it matches the previously stored organizers public key and ensures the contract state is one of two possible values before updating the contract state. Changing the contract state will allow party attendees to check in to the party.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This circuit identifies the caller's `pubKey`, checks that it matches the previously stored organizer's public key, and ensures the contract state is one of two possible values before updating the contract state. Changing the contract state allows party attendees to check in to the party.
```

The `commitAddress()` circuit makes use of a one-way, deterministic hashing function. In order to prove that the caller is some previously stored caller, they provide the same values and those values are hashed again. Comparing these two hashes should match if the caller provided the same value.

Now that the caller is identified and state is as expected, the contract needs to accept payment. Payment for the party is denominated in NIGHT, which is an Unshielded token. All Unshielded tokens are public transactions.

The private party attendees are now public:
```compact
    // take in unshielded payment, party goers are now public
    receiveUnshielded(nativeToken(), entryFee as Uint<128>);
    checkedInParty.insert(disclose(address));

}// end of checkIn
```

The `nativeToken()` function returns the default color of all zeroes, indicating the NIGHT token. After the payment transaction completes, the `address` is `disclose()` and written to the ledger publicly.

> ::::note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::::note[What disclose() does]
```

It is important to verify through `unshieldedBalanceGte()` that the contract balance is as expected. If the balance is too low to perform the `sendUnshielded()` transaction, the circuit execution will fail.

Now the `commitAddress()` circuit:
```compact
circuit commitAddress(_address: Bytes<32>, _secret: Bytes<32>): Bytes<32> {
    return persistentCommit<Bytes<32>>(_address, _secret);
}
```

This circuit makes use of `persistentCommit` to obfuscate the `_address` which is hashed with a random salt value, in this case the `_secret`. It is important to always use sufficiently random salt values, because the inputs to `persistentCommit` can be any simple value that is easily guessable. Due to the sufficiently random salt value, the hash returned does not need to be passed through `disclose()` before crossing into the public domain. It is already considered safe to do so.

Now the `getDappPublicKey()` circuit:
```compact
circuit getDappPublicKey(_secret: Bytes<32>): Bytes<32> {
    return persistentHash<Vector<2, Bytes<32>>>([pad(32, "private-party:pk:"), _secret]);
}
```

> By contrast, the `persistentHash` function is for arbitrary binary data, like the `_secret`. Hashed with the domain seperator specific to this DApp, it produces a "DApp specific public key" that needs to be disclosed if intending to cross into the public domain. This is currently the only safe way to verify the caller of a Compact circuit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By contrast, the `persistentHash` function is for arbitrary binary data, like the `_secret`. Hashed with the domain separator specific to this DApp, it produces a "DApp-specific public key" that needs to be disclosed if intending to cross into the public domain. This is currently the only safe way to verify the caller of a Compact circuit.
```

> By contrast, the `persistentHash` function is for arbitrary binary data, like the `_secret`. Hashed with the domain seperator specific to this DApp, it produces a "DApp specific public key" that needs to be disclosed if intending to cross into the public domain. This is currently the only safe way to verify the caller of a Compact circuit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By contrast, the `persistentHash` function is for arbitrary binary data, like the `_secret`. Hashed with the domain separator specific to this DApp, it produces a "DApp-specific public key" that needs to be disclosed if intending to cross into the public domain. This is currently the only safe way to verify the caller of a Compact circuit.
```

To further inspect circuit data run the zkir linter (optional), from the `/contract` directory:
```bash
npx compact-zkir-lint -r managed/private-party/zkir
```

Successful output:
```
zkir-lint: scanned 5 file(s)

  checkIn (v2, k=11): clean
    instructions: 258  inputs: 4  constrain_bits: 4  cond_select: 6
    guarded regions: 0 (max depth 0)  proof payload: ~96KB

  claimFees (v2, k=11): clean
    instructions: 303  inputs: 4  constrain_bits: 4  cond_select: 2
    guarded regions: 0 (max depth 0)  proof payload: ~96KB

  closeEntry (v2, k=11): clean
    instructions: 63  inputs: 2  constrain_bits: 2  cond_select: 1
    guarded regions: 0 (max depth 0)  proof payload: ~96KB

  rsvp (v2, k=12): clean
    instructions: 179  inputs: 4  constrain_bits: 4  cond_select: 7
    guarded regions: 0 (max depth 0)  proof payload: ~192KB

  startParty (v2, k=11): clean
    instructions: 84  inputs: 2  constrain_bits: 2  cond_select: 8
    guarded regions: 0 (max depth 1)  proof payload: ~96KB

0 error(s), 0 warning(s), 0 info(s) | 5/5 clean
```

### Testing

> Compilation only satifies the Compact compiler with proper syntax. To ensure the contract operates as expected, run the test suite. Comprehensive test suites are essential in writing safe and secure contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compilation only satisfies the Compact compiler with proper syntax. To ensure the contract operates as expected, run the test suite. Comprehensive test suites are essential in writing safe and secure contracts.
```

Be sure the Docker engine is running and start the local devnet:
```bash
yarn env:up
```

This will create a small local blockchain in a Docker container that consists of:
- Midnight Node
- Midnight Indexer

> - Midnight Proof server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Midnight proof server
```

> The proof server is a vital component of Midnight's zero-knowledge proof system. To learn more see [zero-knowledge-proofs](../../concepts/zero-knowledge-proofs.mdx).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proof server is a vital component of Midnight's zero-knowledge proof system. To learn more, see [Zero-knowledge proofs](../../concepts/zero-knowledge-proofs.mdx).
```

   ✓ Private Party smart contract via midnight-js > Allows Bob to rsvp (privately)  17232ms
   ✓ Private Party smart contract via midnight-js > Blocks organizers from rsvp 145ms
   ✓ Private Party smart contract via midnight-js > Allows Claire to rsvp(privately)  17184ms
   ✓ Private Party smart contract via midnight-js > Blocks non-organizers from starting the party 154ms
   ✓ Private Party smart contract via midnight-js > starts the party  17177ms
   ✓ Private Party smart contract via midnight-js > Allows Bob to check in  17338ms
   ✓ Private Party smart contract via midnight-js > Blocks non-organizers from closing the doors 150ms
   ✓ Private Party smart contract via midnight-js > Closes the doors to the party  17175ms
   ✓ Private Party smart contract via midnight-js > Allows Alice to claimFees  41849ms
   ✓ Private Party smart contract via midnight-js > Deploys the contract(the hard way)  16823ms
```

Read through the MidnightJS components that enable these tests in `/src/test/party.test.ts`. To learn more about testing specifically, see [Test and debug](../../compact/test-and-debug.mdx).

## Conclusion

> This concludes the private party tutorial, hopefully you enjoyed the private party -- or was it really private? The inclusion of the Unshielded NIGHT token exposed the party attendees. To maintain their privacy, rework this contract and test suite to use Shielded tokens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This concludes the private party tutorial. The inclusion of the Unshielded NIGHT token exposed the party attendees. To maintain their privacy, rework this contract and test suite to use Shielded tokens.
```

> To inspect the full private-party repository see [example-private-party](https://github.com/midnightntwrk/example-private-party). Drop a message in Discord dev-chat that you've completed this tutorial and you are now a party planner or if you *mustache* any questions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To inspect the full private-party repository, see [example-private-party](https://github.com/midnightntwrk/example-private-party). If you have questions, reach out in the Discord dev-chat channel.
```
